Course Code : ECOE80
Course Title : MICROCONTROLLERS
ec 3 0 0 3
Prerequisites
(Course code)

: ECPC34

Course Type : OE

Course Learning Objectives
Course will provide the understanding of the difference between microprocessor and
microcontroller and basics of embedded System. Students will be able to apply the principles of
logic design in understanding architecture and memory organization, understand different
peripherals and their interfacing concepts with microcontroller.
Course Content

UNIT I
INTRODUCTION: Comparing Microprocessors and Microcontrollers. Technological trends in
Microcontrollers development, Survey of microcontrollers- 4 bit, 8 bit, 16 bit, 32 bit
microcontrollers, Applications of microcontrollers.
UNIT II
8051 ARCHITECTURE: Block diagram, pin diagram of 8051. Functional descriptions of
internal units, registers, PSW, internal RAM, ROM, Stack, Oscillator and Clock. I/O Pins, Ports
and Circuits Connecting external memory, Counters and timers. Serial data interrupt. Serial data
transmission/reception and transmission modes, Timer flag interrupt. External interrupt, software
generated interrupts. External memory and memory space decoding, expanding I/Os, memory
mapped I/O Reset & CLK Circuits.
UNIT III
8051 INSTRUCTION SET AND PROGRAMMING: 8051 Instruction syntax, addressing
modes, Data transfer instructions, logical instructions, arithmetic instructions, Jump and Call
instructions. Interrupts and interrupt handler subroutines, Writing assembly Language programs,
Time delays, Pure S/W time delays. S/W polled timer, Pure H/W delay. Lookup tables, Serial
data transmission using time delays and polling. Interrupt driven serial transmission and reception.
UNIT IV
8051 APPLICATIONS: Interfacing Keyboards Programs for small keyboards and matrix
keyboards. Interfacing multiplexed displays, numeric displays and LCD displays, Measuring

frequency and pulse width, Interfacing ADCs & DACs. Hardware circuits for handling multiple
interrupts, 8051 Serial data communication modes- Mode 0, Mode 1, Mode 2 and Mode 3.
Reference Books:
1. K. J. Ayala, The 8051 Microcontroller – 2nd ed. Penram International.
2. Intel’s manual on “Embedded Microcontrollers”
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able to
1. apply knowledge of mathematics, engineering to understand concepts in
microcontroller based system.
2. analyze a problem and formulate appropriate computing solution for
microcontroller based applications.
3. design experiments in microcontrollers analyze computer based process to
meet desired needs
4. work, document and present as an individual and as a team-member to design
formulate and implement experiments using modern tools.
5. Select appropriate microcontroller for different application.
6. Write and execute assembly language programs (software) for given application