Course Code : ECOE81
Course Title : Sensor Technology
ec 3 0 0 3
Prerequisites(Course
code)

: ECPE70
Course Type : OE
Course Learning Objectives
Course will provide the understanding of the right sensors for a given application and desi
gn basic circuit building blocks. Also help to simulate, synthesize, and layout a complete
sensor and sensor system.
Course Content

Unit I
Principles of Sensing, Classification and Terminology of Sensors, Measurands. Sensors ty
pes and classification – mechanical, acoustic, magnetic, thermal, chemical, radiation and b
iosensors.
Unit II
PHYSICAL PRINCIPLE OF SENSING: Electric charges, field and potential, capacita
nce, magnetism and induction, resistance, piezeoelectric effect, hall effect, temperature an
d thermal properties of materials, heat transfer, light, dynamic models of sensor elements.
Unit III
Wireless Sensors and its applications, Modeling and simulation of microsensors and actu
ators, Sensors and smart structures. Micro-opto-electro-mechanical sensors and system, In
terworking with IoT.
Unit IV
SENSORS IN DIFFERENT APPLICATION AREAS: occupancy and motion detectors, position displacement and level, velocity and acceleration, force, strain and tactile senso
rs, pressure sensors and temperature sensors.

Reference Books:
1. J. Fraden, Handbook of Modern Sensors:Physical, Designs, and Applications, AIP
Press, Springer.
2. Sze S.M “Semiconductor Sensors”, John Wiley, New York, 1994.
3. Ristic L,“Sensor Technology and Devices”, Artech House, London, 1994.
4. Gerard Meijer, Kofi Makinwa, “Smart Sensor Systems: Emerging Technologies
and Applications”, ISBN: 978-0-470-68600-3,April 2014.

Course outcomes
1. understand the concept of sensors and its characteristics.
2. understand the practical approach in design of technology based on different
sensors
3. learn various sensor materials and technology used in designing sensors
4. synthesis and analyze wireless sensors for advanced applications
5. understand the software and hardware designing aspects of sensors co-existing with
other systems
6. propose new applications for sensors.