Course Code : ECPE84
Course Title : Artificial Intelligence and Expert Systems
ec 3 0 0 3
Prerequisites
(Course code)

: MAIR11, ECPC32

Course Type : PE

Course Learning Objectives
To present the concepts of intelligent agents, searching, knowledge and reasoning, 
planning, learning neural networks and expert systems.
Course Content
UNIT I
INTRODUCTION: Introduction to AI: Intelligent agents, Perception, Natural language
processing, Problem Solving agents, Searching for solutions: Uniformed search strategies,
Informed search strategies.
UNIT 1I

KNOWLEDGE AND REASONING: Adversarial search, Optimal and imperfect decisions,
Alpha, Beta pruning, Logical agents: Propositional logic, First order logic, Syntax and semantics,
Using first order logic, Inference in first order logic. Uncertainty, acting under uncertainty, Basic
probability notation, Axioms of probability, Baye’s rule, Probabilistic reasoning, Making simple
decisions.
UNIT 1II

PLANNING AND LEARNING: Planning: Planning problem, Partial order planning, Planning
and acting in non-deterministic domains. Learning: Learning decision trees, Knowledge in
learning, Neural networks, Reinforcement learning, Passive and active.


UNIT 1V
EXPERT SYSTEMS: Definition, Features of an expert system, Organization, Characteristics,
Prospector, Knowledge Representation in expert systems. Expert system tools, MYCIN.
Reference Books:
1. Stuart Russel and Peter Norvig, Artificial Intelligence A Modern Approach, Pearson
Education, 2nd Edition, 2003.
2. Donald A. Waterman, A Guide to Expert Systems, Pearson Education.
3. George F. Luger, “Artificial Intelligence – Structures and Strategies for Complex Problem
Solving, Pearson Education, 4th Edition, 2002.

4. Elain Rich and Kevin Knight, “Artificial Intelligence, Tata McGraw Hill, 2nd Edition, 1995.
5. W. Patterson, “Introduction to Artificial Intelligence and Expert Systems, Prentice Hall of
India, 2003.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able to:
1. Explain Artificial Intelligence for solving problems.
2. Understand axioms of probability.
3. Explain the principles, concepts and operation certain and uncertain knowledge and
reasoning.
4. Explain the principles, concepts of planning and learning for neural networks.
5. Explain the concepts expert systems.
6. Use expert system tools like MYCIN, EMYCIN.