Course Code : ECPE80
Course Title : Computer Crime Investigation and Forensics
ec 3 0 0 3
Prerequisites
(Course code)

: CSIR11, ECPE51

Course Type : PE

Course Learning Objectives
To understand computer crimes and why computer forensics is an integral part of information
security.
Course Content
UNIT I
Auctions and Trading Mechanisms, safe exchange, payment mechanisms and protocols,
Searching hyperlinked structures, data mining, copyright protection and security, web software
infrastructure, personalization and tracking, integration of catalogues and other trading
information.
UNIT II
Industrial espionage and cyber-terrorism, principles of criminal law, computer forensic
investigation, elements of personnel security and investigations, principles of risk and security
management, conspiracy in computer crime, and computer fraud investigation.
UNIT III
Forensics Overview-Computer Forensics Fundamentals, Benefits of Computer Forensics,
Computer Crimes, Computer Forensics Evidence and the Courts, Legal Concerns and Privacy
Issues. Forensics Process-Forensics Investigation Process, Securing the Evidence and Crime
Scene, Chain of Custody, Law Enforcement Methodologies
UNIT IV
Forensics Evidence-Evidence Sources, Evidence Duplication, Preservation, Handling, and
Security, Forensics Soundness, Order of Volatility of Evidence, Collection of Evidence on a Live
System, Court Admissibility of Volatile Evidence, Forensics Readiness-Benefits of Forensic
Readiness, Preparing an Organization for Forensics Investigations, Managing an Investigation,
Internet Forensics-Reconstructing Past Internet Activities and Events, E-mail Analysis, Messenger
Analysis: AOL, Yahoo, MSN, and Chat

Reference Books:
1. Sherri Davidoff, Jonathan Ham. Network Forensics: Tracking Hackers Through Cyberspace,
Prentice Hall, 2012.
2. Clint P Garrison. Digital Forensics for Network, Internet, and Cloud Computing: A Forensic
Evidence Guide for Moving Targets and Data, Syngress, 2010. ISBN 1597495387,
9781597495387.
3. Vacca, J, Computer Forensics, Computer Crime Scene Investigation, 2nd Ed, Charles River
Media, 2005.
4. Gallegos F, Computer Forensics: An Overview, Volume 6, 2005, Located at: Computer
Forensics: An Overview (last visited Dec. 26, 2006)
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able to...
1. Understand computer forensics, prepare for computer investigations
2. Understand enforcement agency investigations and corporate investigations
3. Maintain professional conduct
4. Understand how to identify needs for computer forensics tools
5. Evaluate the requirements and expectations for computer forensics tools
6. Understand how computer forensics hardware and software tools are integrated and validated