Course Code : ECOE71
Course Title : Introduction To Communication Engineering

ec 3 0 0 3
Prerequisites
(Course code)

: ECIR11

Course Type : OE

Course Learning Objectives
To familiarize the students with the evolution and basics of communication engineering and
their applications. The student should also be able to explain a transmission line, do transmission
line calculations using smith chart. The students should be able to name the basic elements of
optical fiber transmission link, describe fiber modes and different types of fibers and their
losses.
Course Content
UNIT I
ANALOG COMMUNICATION: Basic constituents of Communication System, Amplitude
modulation, modulation index, DSBSC modulation, SSB modulation, vestigial side band
modulation, Angle modulation, frequency and phase modulation spectrum of FM Wave,
modulation index and Band width of FM Signal, NBFM and WBFM, Transmitter and Receiver,
Classification of radio transmitters, Classification of radio receivers, NOISE, Classification of
noise, various sources of noise.
UNIT II
DIGITAL COMMUNICATION: Pulse Modulation, PAM, PPM, PCM, PWM, DM, Baseband
Pulse transmission, Matched filter and its properties, average probability of symbol error in binary
enclosed PCM receiver, Intersymbol interference, Digital pass band transmission, Gram Schmidt
orthogonalization procedure, geometric Interpretation of signals, Hierarchy of digital modulation
techniques, BPSK, DPSK, DEPSK, QPSK, systems; ASK, FSK, QASK, Many FSK, MSK, Spread
spectrum modulation, Pseudonoise sequence, A notion of spread spectrum, direct sequence spread
spectrum with coherent BPSK.
UNIT III
PROPAGATION OF RADIO WAVES AND WAVEGUIDES: Different modes of
propagation, Ground waves, Space waves, Surface waves and Tropospheric waves, Ionosphere,
Wave propagation in the ionosphere, Transmission line equations, graphical methods, Smith chart,
Time domain and frequency domain analysis, TE, TM and TEM waves, TE and TM modes in
rectangular and Circular wave guides.
UNIT IV
OPTICAL COMMUNICATION: Propagation within the fiber, Numerical aperture of fiber,
diffraction, step index and graded index fiber, Modes of propagation in the fiber, Single mode and
multi mode fibers, Losses in Optical Fiber, Rayleigh Scattering Losses, Absorption Losses, Leaky
modes, mode coupling losses, Bending Losses, Combined Losses in the fiber.
Reference Books:
1. E.C.Jordan and K.G.Balmain, Electromagnetic Waves and Radiating Systems, PHI, 2nd
Edition, 2000.
2. Simon Haykin, Communication Systems, John Wiley, 5th Edition, 2009.
3. John G. Proakis, Digital Communication, PHI, 4th Edition, 2003.
4. John Gowar, Optical Communication Systems, Prentice Hall, 2nd Edition, 1993.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course, student will be able to;
1. Acquire knowledge about analog communication.
2. Learn the basics of digital communication.
3. Understand Pulse modulation and its types.
4. Classify various types of radio transmitters and radio receivers.
5. Tell various types of waves and their propagation.
6. Acquire knowledge of fiber, its various modes and losses.