Course Code : ECOE70
Course Title : Cellular Mobile Communication
ec 3 0 0 3
Prerequisites
(Course code)

: ECPC35, ECPC32, ECPC53

Course Type : OE

Course Learning Objectives
To understand the cellular concept, small scale and large scale fading, diversity reception and
different types of multiple access techniques
Course Content
UNIT I
CELLULAR SYSTEM: Hexagonal geometry cell and concept of frequency reuse, Channel
Assignment Strategies, Distance to frequency reuse ratio, Channel & co-channel interference
reduction factor, S/I ratio consideration and calculation for Minimum Co-channel and adjacent
interference, Handoff Strategies, Umbrella Cell Concept, Trunking and Grade of Service,
Improving Coverage & Capacity in Cellular System-cell splitting, Cell Sectorization, Repeaters,
Micro cell zone concept, Channel antenna system design considerations.
UNIT II
LARGE SCALE PATH LOSS: Free Space Propagation loss equation, Path-loss of NLOS and
LOS systems, Reflection, Ray ground reflection model, Diffraction, Scattering, Link budget
design, Max. Distance Coverage formula, Empirical formula for path loss, Indoor and outdoor
propagation models.

UNIT III
SMALL SCALE FADING: Small scale multipath propagation, Impulse model for multipath
channel, Delay spread, Feher’s delay spread, upper bound Small scale, Multipath measurement
parameters of multipath channels, Types of small scale fading, Rayleigh and Rician distribution,
Diversity techniques in brief.
UNIT IV

ACCESS TECHNIQUES: Introduction and comparisons of various multiple access strategies-
TDMA, CDMA, FDMA, OFDM, CSMA and modulation schemes for wireless communication.


Reference Books:
1. Theodore S. Rappaport, Wireless Communications Principles and Practice, 2nd Edition,
Prentice Hall.
2. Kamilo Feher, Wireless Digital Communications, Modernization & Spread Spectrum
Applications, Prentice Hall.
3. KavehPahlavan and Allen H. Levesque, Wireless Information Networks, John Wiley and
Sons Inc.

Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able to ...
1. Apply and analyze the concepts of cellular system
2. Understand the different techniques for capacity enhancement of a cellular system
3. Compute path loss using various path loss models
4. Understand and analyze small and large scale fading
5. Compare the various multiple access techniques
6. Understand the basics of propagation of radio signals