Course Code : ECPE78
Course Title : Nano Electronics
ec 3 0 0 3
Prerequisites
(Course code)

: PHIR11, PHIR13, ECIR11

Course Type : PE

Course Learning Objectives
The major goals and objectives are to provide the students with knowledge and understanding of
nano-electronics and their applications in nanotechnology
Course Content
UNIT I
Survey of modern electronics and trends towards nanoelectronics. Discussion of the International
Technology Roadmap characteristics: Need for new concepts in electronics. From
microelectronics towards biomolecule electronics. Introduction to particles and waves, Classical
particles, Classical waves, Wave-particle duality.
UNIT II
Introduction to Wave mechanics, Schrodinger wave equation, Wave mechanics of particles, Atoms
and atomic orbitals. Introduction to Materials for nanoelectronics, Semiconductors, Crystal

lattices: Bonding in crystals, Electron energy bands, Semiconductor heterostructures, Lattice-
matched and pseudomorphicheterostructures, Inorganic-organic heterostructures, Carbon

nanomaterials: nanotubes and fullerenes.
UNIT III
Introduction to Growth, fabrication, and measurement techniques for nanostructures, Bulk crystal
and heterostructure growth, Nanolithography, etching, and other means for fabrication of
nanostructures and nanodevices, Techniques for characterization of nanostructures, Spontaneous
formation and ordering of nanostructures, Clusters and nanocrystals, Methods of nanotube growth,
Chemical and biological methods for nanoscale fabrication, Fabrication of nano-electromechanical
systems, Electron transport in semiconductors and nanostructures, Time and length scales of the
electrons in solids, Statistics of the electrons in solids and nanostructures, Density of states of
electrons in nanostructures, Electron transport in nanostructures.

UNIT IV
Electrons in traditional low-dimensional structures, Electrons in quantum wells, Electrons in

quantum wires, Electrons in quantum dots, Closing remarks, Nanostructure devices, Resonant-
tunneling diodes, Field-effect transistors, Single-electron-transfer devices, Potential-effect

transistors, Light-emitting diodes and lasers, Nano-electromechanical system devices, Quantum-
dot cellular automata.

Reference Books:
1. C. P. Poole and F. J. Owens, Introduction to nanotechnology, John Wiley & Sons, 2003.
2. C. Dupas, P. Houdy, M. Lahmani Nanoscience: Nanotechnologies and Nanophysics,
Springer, 2004.
3. Nanometer structures: theory, modeling, and simulation, Editor: AkhleshLakhtakia,
ASME Press, 2004.
4. S. E. Lyshevski, Nano- and micro-electromechanical systems fundamentals of nano and
microengineering, 2nd Edition, CRC Press, 2004.
5. http://idol.union.edu/~malekis/ESC24/ESC24MainPage/NanoMainPage.htm
6. http://mrsec.wisc.edu/edetc/index.html
7. www.nanohub.org (SupriyoDatta and Mark Ludstrom lectures)

Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able to
1. Understand basic and advanced concepts of nano-electronic devices.
2. Understand the energy band structures of semiconductors.
3. Understand the wave mechanics of semiconductor and nano-materials.
4. Understand various Materials in the field nanoelectronics.
5. Understand the techniques for characterization of nanostructures.
6. Understand sensors, transducers, and their applications in nanotechnology.