Course Code : ECPE70
Course Title : Wireless Sensor Networks
ec 3 0 0 3
Prerequisites
(Course code)

: ECPE51
Course Type : PE

Course Learning Objectives
WSNs provide an excellent information infrastructure for the remote monitoring, tracking and
control of indoor and outdoor environments, industrial plants, and other applications.
Course Content
UNIT I
Introduction : Wireless Communication Technologies,Wireless Sensor Networks , Application
Areas of WSNs, Principle of Wireless Sensor Networks, IEEE 802.15.4 Standard and Wireless
Sensor Network, Constructing WSNs with IEEE 802.15.4, ZigBee and Wireless Sensor Networks,
6LoWPAN and Wireless Sensor Network, Grand challenges in the design and Implementation of
WSNs
Hardware Design for WSNs: General Wireless Sensor Node Architecture, System-on-Chip and,
Component-based Design, Design Guidelines, Design Case, Energy Scavenging, Embedded
Software Design for WSNs, Cross layer design Issues.
UNIT II
Routing Technologies in WSNs: Classification of Routing Protocols in WSNs, AODV Routing
Protocols Cluster-Tree Routing Protocol, Energy-Aware Routing Protocols
Optimization of Sink Node Positioning: Challenges of Sink Node Positioning, Categories of
Sink Node Positioning Approaches, Optimizing Locations of Static Multiple Sink Nodes, Solving
Optimal Location Problems, Mobile Target Localization and Tracking.
UNIT III
Interference of WSNs with IEEE 802.11b Systems: Wireless Coexistence and Interference in
WSNs, Performance Metrics, Coexistence Mechanism of IEEE 802.15.4, Mitigating Interference
Between IEEE 802.11b, Advanced Mitigation Strategies, Empirical Study

Sensor Data Fusion and Event Detection: Sensor Data Fusion Techniques, Event Detection,
Generic Sensor State Model, Sensor State Model Based Event Detection, Sensor Network as a
Database, WSN Security.

UNIT IV
Hybrid RFID/WSNs for Logistics Management: RFID Tag and reader, Hybrid RFID/Sensor
Network, Generic Hybrid RFID/Sensor Network Architecture , Possible Use in Humanitarian
Logistics Management, Wireless Nano-sensor Networks
Internet of Things: Challenges and Features of the IoT, Connecting WSNs with the Internet, IoT
Service-Oriented Architecture, Possible Implementations in Emergency Response.
ZigBee Smart Home Automation Systems: Analysis of the Existing Home Automation Systems,
Home Automation System Architecture, Building Fire Safety Protection, System Implementation,

Reference Books:
1. Yang, Shuang-Hua, Wireless sensor networks: Principle design and applications, Springer
2. Ian F. Akyildiz, Mehmet Can Vuran, Wireless Sensor Networks, Wiley
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able to......
1. synthesis and analyze wireless sensor network architecture
2. understand the software and hardware designing aspects of WSN
3. learn advanced routing techniques for WSN
4. solve optimal location problems for sink nodes
5. study different data fusion techniques
6. implement IoT through WSN backbone for numerous applications