Course Code : ECPE75
Course Title : Antenna Design
ec 3 0 0 3
Prerequisites
(Course code)

: ECPC51

Course Type : PE

Course Learning Objectives
The objectives of this course are to develop student’s analytical skills and understanding by
introducing to them design concepts of a variety of antenna structures of practical interest. Through
this course they will learn about fundamental principles of Micro-Strip antennas and will also be
able to perform various antenna measurements
Course Content
UNIT I
ANTENNA ARRAYS: Linear, Planar and Circular, Design procedure , Phased Arrays Designs ,
Frequency-Scanning Arrays , Adaptive Arrays and Smart Antennas.
Long-wire Antennas , V-Antennas , Rhombic Antennas , Cylindrical Antennas , Self and Mutual
Impedances, Traveling Wave antennas, Fractal Antennas, Aperture Antennas Design
Considerations.
UNIT II
MICRO-STRIP ANTENNAS: Salient features of Micro-Strip antennas , Advantages and
Limitations , Rectangular micro-strip antennas , Circular Patch , Feed methods , Characteristics ,
Impact of different parameters on characteristics , Methods of analysis and tuning , Techniques for
increasing bandwidth and size reduction , Design and analysis of Micro-Strip Arrays,
Applications. CAD model.
UNIT III
ANTENNAS FOR SPECIAL APPLICATIONS: Electrically Small Antennas , Ground-Plane
Antennas , Omnidirectional Antennas, Antenna Design considerations for Satellite
Communication , Receiving versus Transmitting , Bandwidth , Antennas for terrestrial Mobile
Communication Systems , Base station Antennas , Mobile Station Antennas.

UNIT – IV
ANTENNA MEASUREMENTS: Introduction, Basic concept, Reciprocity , Near field and Far
field ,Sources of Error , Measurement ranges , Instrumentation , Measurement of different
Antennas parameters , Directional pattern , Gain , Phase , Polarization , Impedance , Efficiency ,
Current distribution.

Reference Books:
1. John D. Kraus Antennas & wave Propagation 4th Ed.2010, Mc Graw Hill
2. C. A Balanis Antennas Theory Analysis & Design 3rd Ed ,2005, Wiley & Sons
3. Jordan & Balmain Electromagnetic Waves and Radiation systems 2nd Ed ,2016 Pearson
4. K.D Prasad Antennas & Wave Propagation 3rd Ed ,1996 satya Prakashan , N.Delhi

Course Outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able to...
1. Explore and understand advance antenna concepts.
2. Understand the significance of Micro-Strip antennas , methods of analysis and
configurations.
3. Analyze and design antennas arrays.
4. Implement antenna designs for special applications.
5. Acquire knowledge about effects of mutual coupling on antennas, applications and
numerical techniques.
6. Conduct all types of antenna measurements.