Course Code : ECPE74
Course Title : Advanced DSP
ec 3 0 0 3
Prerequisites
(Course code)

: ECPC12, ECPC52, ECLR51

Course Type : PE

Course Learning Objectives
To understand Adaptive Filter, Multirate DSP, Optimum Linear Filters, Cepstrum Analysis and
Homomorphic Deconvolution.
Course Content
UNIT I
ADAPTIVE FILTER: System identification of system modeling, adaptive channel equalization,
echo cancellation in data transmission over telephone channels, suppression of narrowband
interference in a wide band signal, adaptive line enhancer, adaptive noise cancelling, minimum
mean square error criterion, the LMS algorithm, related stochastic gradient algorithm, properties
of LMS algorithm, RLS algorithm, the LDU factorization and square root algorithm, fast RLS
algorithm.
UNIT II
MULTIRATE DSP: Decimation and interpolation, digital filter banks, interconnection of
building blocks, noble identities, polyphase representation, polyphase implementation of uniform
DFT filter banks, fractional decimation, PR systems, multirate implementation, applications of
multirate systems, PR QMF bank, two channel and m-channel QMF banks and polyphase
representations, tree structured filter banks.
UNIT III
OPTIMUM LINEAR FILTERS: Innovation representation of stationary random process,
forward and backward linear prediction, optimum reflection coefficients for lattice forward and
backward predictors. Levinson Durbin algorithm, AR lattice and ARMA lattice ladder filters, FIR
and IIR wiener filter for filtering and prediction.
UNIT IV
CEPSTRUM ANALYSIS AND HOMOMORPHIC DECONVOLUTION: Complex cepstrum
and its properties, complex and real cepstrum for exponential, periodic, minimum phase and
maximum phase sequences, computation of complex cepstrum, homomorphic systems
deconvolution, homomorphic deconvolution, complex cepstrum of simple multipath model and
speech model.

Reference Books:
1. J.G. Proakis and D.G. Manolakis: Digital Signal Processing, 3rd Ed.
2. A.V. Oppenheim and R.W. Schafer: Discrete Time Signal Processing, 3rd Ed.

Course outcomes
1. Compute the use of FFT and DFT.
2. Design and implement FIR and IIR filters
3. Apply the concepts of multirate digital signal processing
4. Understand and apply concepts of adaptive filters in various applications
5. Understand the complex cepstrum of simple multipath model and speech model.
6. Understand and apply the knowledge of Levinson Durbin algorithm, AR lattice and
ARMA lattice ladder filters for prediction.