Course Code : ECOE51
Course Title : Signal Analysis
ec 3 0 0 4
Prerequisites
(Course code)

: MAIR11
Course Type : OE
Course Learning Objectives
To understand continuous time and discrete time signals, Fourier series
representation of CTPS, Continuous Time Fourier Transform, Z- transform and its
properties.
Course Content
UNIT I
INTRODUCTION TO SIGNAL: Continuous time and discrete time signals,
Even and Odd signals. Elementary continuous time and discrete time signals.
Classification of signals, causality; stability, time invariance, linearity. Continuous
time and Discrete time LTI Systems, convolution Integral and convolution sum,
Properties of LTI Systems. Differential and Difference equations.
UNIT II
FOURIER SERIES AND LTI SYSTEMS: Fourier series representation of
CTPS, convergence of FS. Properties of CTFS. Fourier series representation of
DTPS. Properties of DTFS. Fourier series and LTI Systems. Filtering, RC low
pass and high pass filters. Recursive and Non recursive Discrete Time filters.
Sampling theorem, sampling of continuous time signal with impulse train. Aliasing,
Discrete-time processing of continuous time signals.
UNIT III
FOURIER TRANSFORM: Continuous Time Fourier Transform (CTFT),
Convergence of FT. Properties of CTFT. Discrete time Fourier Transform (DTFT).
Properties of DTFT. Systems characterized by Linear constant co-efficient
differential equation and difference equations. Magnitude and phase spectrum,
group delay.

UNIT IV
Z-TRANSFORM: Z-transform and its properties, poles and zeros, Inversion of
Z-transform, One sided Z-transform and solution of differential equations. Analysis
of LTI systems in Z-domain, causality, stability, Relationship between Z-transform
and Fourier transform. Frequency selective filters; all pass filters, minimum-phase,
maximum-phase and mixed-phase systems.
Reference Books:
1. Oppenheim Willsky and Nawab, Signals and Systems, PHI. 3rd Ed.

2. Simon Haykin , Signals and Systems, John Wiley, 3rd Ed.
3. Taub and Schilling, Principles of Communication Systems, TMH, 3rd Ed..

Course outcomes
1 Utilize the concepts of Discrete time and Continuous time signals and their
transformations.
2 Analyze the Fourier series of periodic and Fourier transform of non-periodic
discrete time and continuous time signals.
3 Understand and apply the concepts of bandwidth and filters and Bode plots.
4 Apply the Laplace transform for various applications.
5 Represent continuous time and discrete time systems in the Frequency domain
using Fourier analysis tools like CTFS, CTFT, DTFS and DTFT.
6 Understand and apply the concept of Z transform.