Course Code : ECPC52
Course Title : Digital Signal Processing
ec 3 1 0 4
Prerequisites
(Course code)

: ECPC12
Course Type : PC

Course Learning Objectives
To understand Discrete transforms, implementation of discrete time systems,
design of FIR filters, design of IIR filters.
Course Content
UNIT I
DISCRETE TRANSFORMS: Z-transform and its properties, poles and zeros,
Inversion of Z-transform, One sided Z-transform and solution of differential
equations. Analysis of LTI systems in Z-domain, causality, stability, Relationship
between Z-transform and Fourier transform. Frequency selective filters; all pass
filters, minimum-phase, maximum-phase and mixed-phase systems.
Frequency domain sampling and DFT; properties of DFT, Linear filtering using
DFT, Frequency analysis of signals using DFT, radix 2 & radix-4 FFT algorithms,
Goertzel algorithm, Applications of FFT algorithm, computation of DFT of real
sequences.
UNIT II
IMPLEMENTATION OF DISCRETE TIME SYSTEMS: Direct form,
cascade form, frequency sampling and lattice structures for FIR systems. Direct
forms, transposed form, cascade form parallel form. Lattice and lattice ladder
structures for IIR systems. state space structures.
UNIT III
DESIGN OF FIR FILTERS: Characteristics of practical frequency selective
filters. Filters design specifications peak pass band ripple, minimum stop band
attenuation. Four types of FIR filters Design of FIR filters using windows. Kaiser
window method comparison of design methods for FIR filters Gibbs phenomenon,
design of FIR filters by frequency sampling method, design of optimum equiripple
FIR filters, alternation theorem.
UNIT IV
DESIGN OF IIR FILTERS: Design of IIR filters from analog filters, Design by
approximation of derivatives, Impulse invariance method bilinear transformation
method characteristics of Butterworth, Chebyshev, and Elliptical analog filters and
design of IIR filters, Frequency transformation.

Reference Books:
1. John G. Proakis, Digital Signal Processing, PHI
2. S. K. Mitra, Digital Signal Processing , TMH
3. Rabiner and Gold, Digital Signal Processing, PHI
4. Salivahan, Digital Signal Processing , TMH
Course outcomes
1. Understand discrete- time sequences and Z-transform.
2. Compute DFT and FFT of discrete time signals.
3. Design FIR and IIR filters using different techniques.
4. Design frequency selective filters.
5. Learn the DSP programming tools and use them for applications
6. Design and implement signal processing modules in DSPs