Course Code : ECPC50
Course Title : Information Theory And Coding
ec 3 1 0 4
Prerequisites
(Course code)

: ECPC12, ECPC35

Course Type : PC

Course Learning Objectives
To understand elements of information theory and source coding, Linear block
codes, Cyclic codes, Convolutional codes
Course Content
UNIT I
ELEMENTS OF INFORMATION THEORY AND SOURCE CODING:
Introduction, information as a measure of uncertainty, Entropy & its properties,
Entropy of continuous sources, Discrete memoryless channels, Mutual information
& its properties, BSC, BEC. Channel capacity, Shanon’s theorem on coding for
memoryless noisy channels, Shanon’s three fundamental theorems.
Separable binary codes, Shanon–Fano encoding, Noiseless coding, Theorem of
decodability, Average length of encoded message, Shanon’s binary encoding,
Fundamental theorem of discrete noiseless coding, Huffman’s minimum
redundancy codes, capacity of colored noise source, water filling algorithms.
UNIT II
LINEAR BLOCK CODES: Groups & fields, Galois fields & its construction,
Minimal polynomial, Vector spaces, Dual spaces, Linear block codes, Syndrome
& error detections, Minimum distance, Error detecting and correcting capabilities
of a block code, Standard array & Syndrome decoding, Hamming code.
UNIT III
CYCLIC CODES: Description of cyclic codes, Polynomial representation,
Minimum degree code polynomial, Generator polynomial, Generator matrix,
Systematic form, Parity check matrices, cyclic codes encoders, Syndrome
computation and error detection, Cyclic Hamming codes, Decoding of cyclic codes.
UNIT IV
CONVOLUTIONAL CODES: Encoding of Convolution codes, Structural
properties of Convolution codes, State diagram, Code tree, Trellis diagram, Free
distance, Coding gain, Viterbi decoding, distance properties of binary
convolutional codes, Burst error correcting convolutional codes.


Reference Books:
1. F. M. Reza, Information Theory, McGraw Hill, 1
st Ed..
2. Das, Mullick and Chatterjee, Digital Communication, Wiley Eastern Ltd, 3rd Ed..
3. Shu Lin and J. Costello, Error Control Coding, Prentice Hall, 3rd Ed..

Course outcomes
1. Understand the concepts of Random variables and stochastic processes and
their applications in communication engineering.
2. To be able to perform the time and frequency domain analysis of the signals
in a digital communication system.
3. Understand and apply the Entropy function, source coding and the three
Shannon's fundamental theorems.
4. Design the linear block codes and cyclic codes.
5. Understand and apply the convolutions codes state diagrams, code tree and
trellis diagrams, decoding algorithms.
6. Understand and evaluate the channel performance using Information
theory.