Course Code : ECPC43
Course Title : Control System Engineering
ec 3 1 0 4
Prerequisites
(Course code)

: MAIR-11, MAIR-12

Course Type : PC

Course Learning Objectives
To understand the control system and components, time response analysis, stability, the
root locus technique, frequency response analysis, stability in frequency domain, state
variable analysis.
Course Content
UNIT I
INTRODUCTION: The control system, historical development of automatic control
system, mathematical models of physical systems, Differential equation of physical
systems, transfer function, block diagram algebra, signal flow-graphs, feedback
characteristics of control systems, Feedback and non-feedback systems, reduction of
parameter variations by use of feedback, Control over system dynamics by use of feedback,
control of the effect of disturbance signal by use of feedback.
UNIT II
CONTROL SYSTEM AND COMPONENTS: Linear approximation of non-linear
systems, electrical systems, stepper Motor.
TIME RESPONSE ANALYSIS: Standard test signals, time response of first order and
second order systems, steady-state errors and error constants, design specification of
second-order-systems.
STABILITY: The concept of stability necessary conditions for stability, Hurwitz stability
criterion, Routh stability criterion, Relative stability analysis.
THE ROOT LOCUS TECHNIQUE:The Root locus concept, construction of root loci, root
contours.
UNIT III
FREQUENCY RESPONSE ANALYSIS: Correlation between time and frequency
response, Polar Plots, Bode Plots, experimental determination of transfer function.

STABILITY IN FREQUENCY DOMAIN: Nyquist stability criterion, relative stability
using Nyquist Criterion, closed-loop frequency response.
UNIT IV
INTRODUCTION TO DESIGN: Considerations of classical design, realization of basic
compensators, cascade compensation in time domain, cascade compensation in frequency
domain, feedback compensation.
STATE VARIABLE ANALYSIS: Concept of state,state variable and state model, state
models for linear continuous time systems, Diagonalization solution of state equations,
Concept of controllability and observability, Pole placement by state feedback.
Reference Books:
1. I.J.Nagrath and M.Gopal, Control Systems Engineering.
2. B.C.Kuo, Automatic Control Systems.
Course outcomes
1. Characterize various types of control systems along with their historical
development.
2. Learn to accomplish mathematical modeling of various control systems and
understand various effects on them in the presence of feedback.
3. Identify various control system components.
4. Perform time domain and stability analysis of various control systems analytically
and through graphical technique such as root locus.
5. Analyze and determine stability of various control systems in frequency domain
using Bode plots and Nyquist criterion etc.
6. Realize basic compensators both in time and frequency domain and perform state
variable analysis.