Course Code : ECPC42
Course Title : Microprocessor And Microcontroller
ec 3 0 0 3
Prerequisites
(Course code)

: ECPC34
Course Type : PC

Course Learning Objectives
To learn importance of microprocessors and microcontrollers, understand architecture and
programming of 8086 processors, interfacing techniques like memory and I/O Interfacing
with microprocessor and microcontroller.
Course Content
UNIT I
INTRODUCTION TO MICROPROCESSOR AND MICROCONTROLLER: Evolution
of microprocessors, technological trends in microprocessor development, The Intel family
tree, applications of Microprocessors.
INTRODUCTION TO 16-BIT MICROPROCESSOR ARCHITECTURE: 
8086 Block diagram; description of data registers, address registers; pointer and index
registers, PSW, Queue, BIU and EU, 8086 Pin diagram descriptions. Microprocessor BUS
types and buffering techniques, 8086 minimum mode and maximum mode CPU module.
8086 CPU Read/Write timing diagrams in minimum mode and maximum mode.
UNIT II
8086 INSTRUCTION SET: Instruction formats, addressing modes, Data transfer
instructions, string instructions, logical instructions, arithmetic instructions, transfer of
control instructions; process control instructions; Assembler directives, writing assembly
Language programs for logical processing, arithmetic processing, timing delays; loops,
data conversions, Writing procedures; Data tables, modular programming, Macros.

UNIT III
INTERFACING AND PROGRAMMABLE DEVICES: Basic interfacing concepts and
address decoding techniques. Interfacing output displays, memory, D/A & A/D
converters, Programmable interval timer, programmable peripheral interface 8255.

INTERRUPTS AND DMA: Interrupt driven I/O. 8086 Interrupt mechanism; interrupt
types and interrupt vector table, Programmable interrupt controller 8259, programmable
DMA controller 8237.
UNIT IV
INTRODUCTION TO MICRO CONTROLLERS (8051): Micro controllers & Embedded
processors, Overview of 8051 family, Instruction set, Introduction to 8051 assembly
language programming, Program counter, data types & directives, flag, Registers, Stack,
Hardware Description, I/O Port programming, Timer and counter programming, Serial
communication, Interrupt programming, Interfacing, 16 & 32 bit micro controllers, PIC
and ARM controllers
Reference Books:
1. D.V.Hall , Microprocessors and Interfacing , McGraw Hill 2nd ed.
2. M A Mazidi, J G Mazidi, R D Mc Kinlay “The 8051 Micro controllers & Embedded
Systems”, 2nd Indian reprint, Pearson education, (2002).
3. J Uffenbeck , The 8086/8088 family, (PHI).
4. Liu,Gibson , Microcomputer Systems – The 8086/8088 family, (2nd Ed-PHI).
5. Kenneth J, Ayala, “8051 Microcontroller: Architecture, Programming and
Application,” 2nd edition, Delmar Learning.
6. John Morton “The PIC Microcontroller: Your Personal Introductory Course”,
Newnes (an imprint of Butterworth-Heinemann Ltd); 3rd Revised Edition (2005).
Course outcomes
At the end of the course, the student will be able to:
1. Develop the basic understanding of 16-bit microprocessor architecture.
2. Program a microprocessor system using assembly language.
3. Understand and capable of interfacing the microprocessor to the I/O devices.
4. Develop simple applications on microprocessor and microcontroller -based systems.
5. Interpret specifications for any microprocessor or peripheral chip.
6. Use compilers and assemblers from open source, third party, and microprocessor/
microcontroller providers