Course Code : ECPC40
Course Title : Analog Electronics
ec 3 1 0 4
Prerequisites
(Course code)

: ECPC30
Course Type : PC

Course Learning Objectives
To enable the students to design multistage amplifiers, oscillators and OP-AMP based
linear and non-linear circuits.

Course Content
UNIT I
Analysis and design of single stage RC- coupled amplifier, Classification of amplifiers,
Direct coupled amplifiers, Multistage amplifiers, Frequency response of amplifiers.
UNIT II
Current Mirrors, Differential Amplifiers (Balanced and Unbalanced output), frequency
response. Introduction to OP-AMP.
UNIT III
OP-AMP with Negatives Feedback and Frequency Response (Open loop and Closed loop)
Compensating network, Circuit stability, slew rate. Operational Transconductance
Amplifier.
UNIT IV
Applications: DC, AC amplifiers, peaking amplifier, summing, sealing, averaging and
instrumentation amplifier, differential input output amplifier, V-I and I-V converter,
integration and differential circuit, wave shaping circuit, active filters, oscillators.

Reference Books:
1. A. Sedra and C. Smith, Microelectronic Circuits: Theory and Applications, Oxford
University Press, 6th Edition, 2013.
2. J. Millman and C. Halkias, Integrated Electronics, McGraw Hill, 2nd Edition, 2009.
3. BehzadRazavi, Design of analog CMOS Integrated circuits, McGraw Hill, 2002.
4. R. A. Gayakwaed, OP-amps and Linear Integrated circuits, Prentice Hall India
Learning Private Limited, 4th Edition 2002.
5. K. R. Botkar, Integrated circuits, Khanna Publishers, 2004.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able to
1. Design single and multistage amplifiers.
2. Understand the kay issues in the designing of differential amplifiers.
3. Understand the design of current mirrors
4. Understand the terminal characteristics of op-amps and design /analyze
fundamental circuits based on op-amps.
5. Understand the use of op-amps in different types of applications.
6. Design integration, differential circuit and wave shaping circuits.