Course Code : ECPE40
Course Title : Object Oriented Programming
ec 3 0 0 3

Prerequisites
(Course code)

: CSIR11
Course Type : PE

Course Learning Objectives
To learn object-oriented programming and utilize it in practical applications by
demonstrating adeptness of object oriented programming in developing solution to
problems demonstrating usage of data abstraction, encapsulation, features of exception
handling, dynamic binding and utilization of polymorphism, and applets.
Course Content:
UNIT I
INTRODUCTION: Object-Oriented Paradigm, Features of Object Oriented
Programming in C++, Fundamentals of data types, Operators and Expressions, Control
flow, Arrays, Strings, Pointers and Functions.
UNIT II
PROGRAMMING IN C++: Classes and Objects, Constructors and Destructors, Operator
Overloading, Inheritance, Virtual Functions and Polymorphism, and Exception Handling.
UNIT III
JAVA INTRODUCTION: An overview of Java, Data Types, Variables and Arrays,
Operators, Control Statements, Classes, Objects, Methods Inheritance. JAVA
PROGRAMMING: Packages, Abstract classes, Interfaces and Inner classes, Exception
handling.
UNIT IV
MULTITHREADING: Introduction to Threads, Multithreading, String handling,
Streams and I/O, and Applets.
Reference Books:
1. Lafore R., Object Oriented Programming in C++, Waite Group.
2. E. Balagurusamy, Object Oriented Programming with C++, Tata McGraw Hill.
3. Deitel and Deitel, “C++ How to Program”, Sixth Edition, Prentice Hall, 2007.

4. Herbert Schildt, “Java The complete reference”, Eighth Edition, McGraw Hill
Professional, 2011.
5. Herbert Schildt, The Complete Reference to C++ Language, McGraw Hill-Osborne.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able to...
1. Understand the concepts of the object oriented programming.
2. Comprehend the adeptness of object oriented programming in developing solution to
problems demonstrating usage of data abstraction, encapsulation and inheritance.
3. Implement patterns involving dynamic binding and utilization of polymorphism.
4. Understand syntax and features of exception handling.
5. Implement solution to various I/O manipulation operations
6. Create two-dimensional graphic components using applets .