Course Code : ECPE41
Course Title : Network Analysis and Synthesis
ec 3 0 0 3

Prerequisites
(Course code)

: ECPC11, MAIR11, MAIR12

Course Type : PE

Course Learning Objectives:
To make the students proficient in analyzing and synthesizing an electrical network
from a given impedance/admittance function.
Course Content
UNIT I
Network Theorems: Superposition theorem, Thevenin’s theorem, Norton’s theorem,
Norton’s theorem, Maximum Power transfer theorem, Reciprocity theorem, Millman’s
theorem, Compensation theorem, Tellegen’s theorem. Network solution methods: nodal
and mesh analysis.
UNIT II
Transient Circuit Analysis: Steady state sinusoidal analysis using phasors, Time domain
analysis of simple linear circuits, Solution of network equations using Laplace transform,
Frequency domain analysis of RLC circuits.
UNIT III
Linear 2‐port network parameters: Driving point and transfer functions, State equations
for networks, Characterization of LTI 2-port networks: Z, Y, ABCD, A’B’C’D’, g and h
parameters, Reciprocity and symmetry. Graph Theory: Tree, Co tree, Link, Basic loop and
basic cut set, Incidence matrix, Cut set matrix, Tie set matrix, Duality, Loop and nodal
methods of analysis.
UNIT IV
Network Synthesis: Properties of Hurwitz polynomial and Positive real function, one
terminal pair network driving point synthesis with LC elements, RC elements, RL
elements, Foster and Cauer form.

Reference Books:
1. Hayt W.H., Kemmerly J.E. and S. M., Engineering Circuit Analysis, 6th Edition, Tata McGraw-Hill Publishing Company Ltd., 2008.
2. Valkenberg V., Network Analysis, 3rd Edition, Prentice Hall International Edition, 2007.
3. Kuo F. F., Network Analysis and Synthesis, 2nd Edition, Wiley India, 2008.

Course outcomes:
At the end of the course student will be able to:
1. Apply the knowledge of basic circuit law and simplify the network using reduction
techniques.
2. Understand the basics single & two-port networks and their different parameters.
3. Classify various functions like transfer functions, driving point functions and synthesis of
different network functions.
4. Familiarize with different network topologies, graph metrics and analysis of network
using graph theory.
5. Apply various theorems for circuit solving.
6. Analyze transient circuit.