Course Code : ECPE42
Course Title : Computer Architecture
ec 3 0 0 3
Prerequisites (Course
code)

: None
Course Type : PE

Course learning objectives:
The objective of this course is to provide students with the basic concepts and principles in
computer architecture so that students have in-depth understanding of computer system
designs.
UNIT I
INTRODUCTION TO COMPUTER HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE: Functional

Units, Historical perspective, Performance of computer, Register transfer and micro-
operations, Information representation, Instruction format, Instruction types, Addressing

modes, Instruction set architectures- CISC and RISC, Super-scaler architecture, Fixed
point and floating point operations.
UNIT II
BASIC PROCESSING UNIT: Fundamental concepts, ALU, Control unit, Multiple bus
organization, Hardwired control, Micro programmed control, Pipelining, Data hazards,
Instruction hazards, Influence on instruction sets, Data path and control considerations,
Performance considerations.
UNIT III

MEMORY ORGANIZATION: Basic concepts, Semiconductor RAM memories, Read-
Only Memories, Speed, Size and Cost, Cache Memories, Performance considerations,

Cache Coherency in Multiprocessor, Virtual Memories, Memory Management
Requirements, Secondary Storage devices.
UNIT IV
I/O ORGANIZATION: Accessing I/O Devices, Programmed I/O, Interrupt-driven I/O,
Direct Memory Access, Buses, Interface Circuits: Serial port, Parallel port, PCI Bus, SCSI
Bus, USB, The External Interface-FireWire and InfiniBand.


Reference Books:
1. C.Hamacher Z. Vranesic and S. Zaky, “Computer Organization”, McGraw-Hill, 5th ed.,
2002.
2. W. Stallings, “Computer Organization and Architecture - Designing for Performance”,
Pearson, 7th ed.,2006.
3. M.M. Mano, “Computer System Architecture”, PHI.
4. J.P.Hayes, “Computer Architecture and Organization”, McGraw-Hill.

Course outcomes:
At the end of the course the student will be able to:
1. Comprehend the basic knowledge of functional components of computer system.
2. Provide an overview of computer system software and understand basic aspects of
performance evaluation.
3. Analyze concept of various addressing modes including design instruction set
architecture.
4. Identify the function of building blocks within CPU of a computer system.
5. Explain memory system design including Cache and Virtual-memory systems.
6. Familiarize with the basic knowledge of I/O devices and interface circuits.