Course Code : ECPC33
Course Title : Measurement and Instrumentation
ec 3 0 0 3
Prerequisites
(Course code)

: ECPC11

Course Type : PC

Course Learning Objectives:
To understand the various measurement techniques, basic working of instruments used for
measurement and errors in measurements and their rectification.
Course Content:
UNIT I
Measurements and Errors: Principles of measurement, accuracy, precision, types of Errors,
limiting Errors, Bridge Measurements (AC and DC bridges), analysis of Linear Systems, time
domain response, Pressure Gauge-Measurement of Flow.
UNIT II
Electromechanical & Digital Indicating Instruments: PMMC Mechanism, DC Ammeters and
Voltmeters, Series and Shunt Type Ohmmeter, Alternating Current Indicating Instruments
(Moving Iron instruments, electrodynamometer instrument), D/A and A/D Converters Digital
Voltmeters, Vector Voltmeter, Guarding Techniques, Automation in Voltmeter.
UNIT III
Signal Generation and Analysis: Sine Wave Generator, Sweep Frequency Generator, Pulse and
Square wave Generator, Function Generator Analyzer, Wave Analyzer, Distortion Analyzer,
Harmonic Distortion Analyzer, Spectrum Analyzer, and Logic Analyzer.
UNIT IV
Measurement systems for non-electrical quantities: Basics of telemetry, Different types of
transducers and displays, Data acquisition system basics. Oscilloscopes and recorders.


Reference Books:
1. Albert.D. Helfrick and William. D. Cooper, Modern Electronic Instrumentation and
Measurement Techniques, PHI.Learning Private Limited, 2010.
2. H. S. Kalsi, Electronic Instrumentation, 3rd Edition, Tata McGraw Hill Publishing
Company Ltd., 2010.
3. Earnest .O Doeblin, Measurement Systems Application and Design, 5th Edition, McGraw
Hill International editions, 2009.
4. A.K.Sawhney, A course in electrical and electronic measurements and instrumentation,
Dhanapat Rai & Sons, 2000.
Course outcomes:
At the end of the course student will be able to:
1. Understand the fundamentals of electronic instrumentation.
2. Measure various electrical parameters with accuracy, precision, resolution.
3. Use AC and DC bridges for relevant parameter measurement.
4. Select appropriate passive or active transducers for measurement of physical
phenomenon.
5. Use Signal Generator, frequency counter, CRO and digital IC tester for appropriate
measurement.
6. Ability to measure frequency, phase with Oscilloscope