Course Code : ECPC32
Course Title : Random Variables & Stochastic Processes
ec 3 1 0 4
Prerequisites
(Course code)

: MAIR11, MAIR12

Course Type : PC

Course Learning Objectives
To understand Random Variables, Standard Distribution Functions Several Random Variables,
Random Processes.
Course Content
UNIT I
RANDOM VARIABLES: Sample space and events, Probability, Conditional Probability,
definition of random variables, cumulative distribution function, probability density function,
discrete random variables, continuous random variables, mathematical expectation, moments of
random variables. Chebyshev inequality.
UNIT II
STANDARD DISTRIBUTION FUNCTIONS: uniform, triangular, Gaussian, Bernoulli,
binomial, negative binomial, geometric, Poissoins, Exponential, Weibul, Gamma, Erlang,
Rayleigh, Rice, lognormal, chi square and other useful disribution functions. Functions of random
variables.
UNIT III
SEVERAL RANDOM VARIABLES: Joint distribution Functions, marginal and conditional
distributions, Expectations, Joint Statistics, Conditional Statistics, independence, Sum of random
variables, Central Limit Theorem, Functions of random variables & random vectors, Joint density
function, mean, variance, correlation, covariance, moments, joint moments, Characteristic
Functions, Convergence of a sequence of random variables,
UNIT IV
RANDOM PROCESSES: Definition and description of Random Processes, Classification of
random processes, statistical characterization, mean, correlation and covariance functions,
Stationary random processes, Ergodicity, Power Spectral density, Weiner-khintchine theorem,
Response of memory- less and linear systems to random inputs, discrete time stochastic processes,
Cyclostationary processes, Gaussian, Poisson, Markov processes.

Reference Books:
1. Papoulis, A. Probability, Random Variables and Stochastic Processes, MGH, 3rd Ed.
2. Gray, R.M. Davission,L.D,Introduction to Statistical Signal Processing- Web Edition-1999.
3. Sundarapandian, V. Probability, Statistics and Queueing Theory, PHI Learning Private
Limited, 3rd Ed.

Course outcomes
1. Understand the basics of probability, events, sample space and how to use them to real life
problems.
2. Characterize probability models and function of random variables based on single &
multiples random variables.
3. Evaluate and apply moments & characteristic functions and understand the concept of
inequalities and probabilistic limits.
4. Understanding of autocorrelation and its relation with power density spectrum and its
properties
5. Understand the concept of random processes and determine covariance and spectral density
of stationary random processes.
6. Demonstrate the specific applications to Poisson and Gaussian processes and representation
of low pass and band pass noise models.