Course Code : ECPC34
Course Title : Digital Design
ec 3 1 0 4
Prerequisites
(Course code)

: ECIR11

Course Type : PC

Course Learning Objectives
To familiarize students with the importance of digital logic design and develop the understanding
towards the need of digital logics in computers and real world applications.
Course Content
UNIT I
Number systems and codes, Laws of Boolean algebra, Theorems of Boolean algebra, Switching
functions, Realization of functions using logic gates. Electronic logic gates, Positive and negative
logic, Logic families, Algebraic methods, Canonical forms of Boolean functions, Minimization of
functions using Karnaugh maps , Minimization of functions using Quine-McClusky method.
UNIT II

Combinational Logic: Combinational circuits, analysis procedure, design procedure, binary adder-
subtractor, decimal adder, Ripple carry adder and Carry look ahead adder, binary multiplier,

magnitude comparator, decoders, encoders, multiplexers.
UNIT III
Sequential Circuit Elements: Latches– RS latch and JK latch, Flip-flops-RS, JK, T and D flip flops,
Master-slave flip flops, Edge-triggered flip-flops. FSM – Moore machine and Mealy machine,
Flip-flops, Next state equations, Next state maps, State table and State transition diagram, Design
of sequential circuits – State transition diagram, State table, Next state maps, Output maps,
Expressions for flip-flop inputs and Expressions for circuit outputs.
UNIT IV
Moore and Mealy state graphs for sequence detection, Methods for reduction of state tables,
Methods for state assignment. Registers and counters- Shift registers, ripple counter, synchronous
Counter, other counters. Memory and programmable logic- RAM, ROM, PLA, PAL.


Reference Books
1. M. Morris Mano and M. D. Ciletti, “Digital Design”, 4th Edition, Pearson Education.
2. Hill & Peterson, “Switching Circuit & Logic Design”, Wiley.
3. Mohammad A. Karim and Xinghao Chen, “Digital Design-Basic concepts and
Principles”, CRC Press Taylor & Francis group, 2010.
4. C. H. Roth, Fundamental s of Logic design, Jaico Publishers, 1998.
5. V. P. Nelson, H.T. Nagle, E.D. Caroll and J.D. Irwin, Digital Logic Circuit Analysis and
Design, Prentice Hall International, 1995.

Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able to...
1. Understand the number systems and Laws of Boolean algebra.
2. Learn the minimization of functions using Karnaugh maps and Quine-McClusky method.
3. Understand the basics of digital design.
4. Design the hardware of various arithmetic logics.
5. Design the hardware using sequential circuit elements
6. Design various digital machines/circuitsto address the need of real world.